If you've got a thousand planets with
life on, maybe life is going to be the
same way 999 out of a thousand times cuz
it's going to be carbon based, it's
going to be water, it's going to be
cells, it's going to be charges, it's
going to be hydrogen and CO2, and you're
going to face the same constraints. If
life is not only abundant, but almost
inevitable, the bottleneck to not seeing
aliens everywhere Well, there's probably
more than one bottleneck, but eukaryotes
in my own mind were the big one. You
could have had Imagine there's like
Frankenstein-like moment where things
zaps alive. I hate I hate that as an
idea. If I was God-fearing person, I
would hear this and I'd be like, "Wow,
this is a vindication of intelligent
design." I mean, I agree with you. It it
I find it a little
almost disturbing.
Today, I'm chatting with Nick Lane, who
is an evolutionary biochemist at
University College London, and he has
many books and papers which help us
reconceptualize life's 4 billion years
in terms of energy flow and helps
explain everything from how life came to
be in the first place to the origin of
eukaryotes to many contingencies we see
today in how life works. So, Nick, maybe
a good place to start would be why are
eukaryotes so significant in your
worldview of why life is the way it is?
Well, first, thanks for having me here.
This is This is fun. I love talking
about this kind of thing. So, so
eukaryotes, what's a eukaryote? It's
basically the cells that make us up, but
also make up plants and make up things
like amoeba or fungi, algae. So,
basically, everything that's large and
complex that you can see is composed of
this one cell type called the eukaryotic
cell. We have a nucleus where all the
DNA is, where all the genes are, and
then all those kind of
machinery, cell membranes, and things.
So, there's basically a lot of kit in in
in these cells. And
the weirdness is if you look inside a
plant cell or a fungal cell, it looks
exactly the same under an electron
microscope as one of our cells, but they
have a completely different lifestyle.
So, why would they have all the same kit
if they evolved to be a single-celled
alga living in an ocean doing
photosynthesis? It's still got the same
kit that our cells have. So, we know
that because they share all of these
things, they arose once in the whole
history of life on Earth. There could
have been multiple origins, but there's
no evidence for that. They you know, if
there was it disappeared without trace.
So, we've got this kind of singularity
which happened about 2 billion years
ago, about 2 billion years into the
history of life on Earth. Then this
thing happens once that gives rise to
all complex life on Earth.
The one thing which I I I guess you
could conclude from that is bacteria and
archaea
in terms of their genetic repertoire,
they're actually they've got a lot more
genes, a lot more versatility than
eukaryotes do. It's just that a single
bacterial cell has much less in it, but
there's so many different types of
bacterial cell that overall, they've
kind of explored genetic sequence space.
They had 4 billion years to have a go at
that, and they never came up with the
trick, which says it's not in the genes.
It's not about information. There's
something else which is which is
controlling it. And that something I
think is the acquisition of these power
packs in our cells called mitochondria.
Now, let's go to the origin of life, and
you have this
really compelling story
where you imagine that the first life
forms were continuous with Earth's
geochemistry. Yeah. If you can
recapitulate the story a little bit, and
then I want to ask a question.
>> I mean, I'll tell you how I got there
first because I started out working on
mitochondria, and that took me into the
evolution of eukaryotes. So, when
eukaryotes acquire these endosymbionts
that that
that become mitochondria, and they
change the potential of evolution. It
doesn't change everything immediately,
but it changes where the end points can
be. Yeah. And it allows the evolution of
these large complex cells and then
eventually multicellular organisms and
us.
So, what are what are mitochondria
actually doing? Well, what they're
actually doing is is respiration.
They're generating energy for cells.
They're doing plenty of other things as
well, but the
the main thing we can think about is
they're the energy producers.
And they're derived from bacteria, and
bacteria produce their energy in exactly
the same way. They're generating energy
by generating an electrical charge on
the membrane. And that charge it's
small, but the membrane's really thin.
So, the charge is about 150 to 200 mV,
but the membrane is 5 nm in thickness.
So, that's 5 millionths of a millimeter.
So, if you shrank yourself down to the
size of a molecule or stood next to that
membrane
you would experience 30 million volts
per meter which is equivalent to a bolt
of lightning. So, that's the that's the
the strength of the force
of of the of the voltage across the
membrane, which is colossal. And it's
generated by really sophisticated
proteins that pump protons across the
membrane.
And then there's ATP synthase, which is
again pretty much universal, and it's a
rotating nanomotor that sits in the
membrane. This is colossally complex,
interesting machinery, and it's
universally conserved. It's as conserved
as say a ribosome, the protein-building
factories. It's pretty much everywhere
across life.
So, you wonder how on Earth did life
come to be that way? And if it's
conserved universally across life, it
looks like it goes right back to the
common ancestors of all of cells. And so
there's the the question how did it
arise in the first place?
>> Yeah. And that that was actually for me
tremendously thrilling because it it
it's a way in as a researcher to the
origin of life. It says how did these
energy-generating systems arise in the
first place? And and and and my way in
was really the gates were opened by by
Bill Martin and Mike Russell who around
the early 2000s were publishing some
amazing papers together where they were
saying that in in this deep-sea
hydrothermal vent rather than it being
like a black smoker with a chimney with
smoke belching out of the top, it's like
a a mineralized sponge
with lots of pores that are cell-like in
their structure.
And you've got an acidic early ocean,
and you've got alkaline fluids coming
out of these.
And you've got mixing going on in this
whole system. And so, you could at least
imagine that you've got a
pore in here which is a bit like a cell
in terms of its size and its shape. And
on the outside, you've got acid ocean
waters percolating in, and on the
inside, you've got these hydrothermal
fluids. So, you've got a barrier. You've
got an an inside and an outside, and
you've got more protons outside coming
in
potentially driving work. So, it's very
much like a cell is structured. And the
other thing is
what are these minerals? You've got
these these mineralized sponge of pores
with minerals. Well, the minerals we
think on the early Earth would have been
a lot of a lot of metals in there. So,
things like iron sulfide or nickel
sulfides and things like that. Now, the
reason that's important is that
what plant cells do, but also what
autotrophic bacteria do is they take CO2
and they take hydrogen and they react
them together to basically make all the
building blocks of life. Now, plants do
the plants get the hydrogen from water,
H2O. They take the H2 out of water and
throw away the oxygen, and that collects
in the atmosphere. But what what
bacteria very often do is they've got
hydrogen bubbling out of a hydrothermal
vent. They just take the hydrogen
straight gas, and they react it with
CO2, and they make all the building
blocks of life. So, what what are the
enzymes that they use to do that? Well,
they're very often using these same
metals that you would have found in the
early oceans, nickel and and iron and so
on.
And how are they powering the the the
reaction between hydrogen and CO2? Well,
they're using this membrane potential,
the electrical potential, the difference
in protons between the outside and the
inside to drive that work. So,
effectively, to power the reaction
between hydrogen and CO2 to make
organics and drive growth. So, so this
is all this was all kind of in place
before before I came along. This was
coming from Mike Russell and Bill
Martin.
And the details are very uncertain, and
whether or not you can really drive any
biochemistry that way is very uncertain.
But but you know, it's a thrilling idea
because you've got a you've got a
continuity between a geological
environment
and cells as we know them.
And
that if if if it did emerge that way,
then it would say, "Well, here's why
bacteria have got this charge on their
membrane."
Cuz it was there in a hydrothermal vent
from the beginning. It always powered
work from the very beginning. And that's
why in the end an endosymbiosis that
gives rise to eukaryotes
would give would allow the kind of free
you from the constraints of generating a
charge on a membrane. Now, you
internalize that in eukaryotes, and now
you've you're free to become large and
more complex. So, so so you've gone from
you know, thinking about a puzzle about
why eukaryotes are special to thinking
about planetary systems and thinking
about the origin of life and what are
the forces that are going to give rise
to life, and how would that constrain
life, and would we see the same things
on other planets or something different?
What are what are the fundamental
reasons that it works this way? So, it
becomes astrobiology really. And and and
it's a it's a thrilling change of
perspective
to come from my my own background was to
do with mitochondrial biology, actually
in organ transplantation once upon a
time.
And and spinning on a pinhead, you end
up working on the origin of life. It's
fantastic. Yeah. I mean, it's it's so
fascinating. So, just to recapitulate
for my own understanding and the
audience's
you have the analog of a cell in these
pores. You have something which
concentrates the build-up of these
organics so that they don't just all
diffuse in some large big primordial
soup. And so, this is why you think like
some primordial lake is not where this
happened. It had to be concentrated in
some entity. Then you've got
a chemiosmotic gradient, a proton
gradient, which drives work. And
specifically, it favors the fixation of
carbon dioxide and to you know, to drive
the reaction with hydrogen gas to make
organics. And then you've got along this
membrane, you've got catalyst which are
basically early enzymes. So you've got
enzymes, you've got the cell, you've got
the proton gradient.
And then the story is basically that
you make very simple organics with CO2
and H2 and then those simple organics
are then
re-catalyzed to make more and more
complex organics and like basically TLDR
metabolism and like fatty acids and
nucleotides and everything else. Yeah.
That's basically it. Yeah. Um so so so
so what do you get if you react hydrogen
and CO2? What you get are what are
called Krebs cycle intermediates, so
carboxylic acids, small molecules made
only of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
with this organic acid group at the end
which can be two, three, four, five
carbon units in the chain. And this is
your basic building blocks. You you add
on ammonia to this and you you get an
amino acid. You add more hydrogen on and
you're going to get a sugar. Um you
react amino acids with sugars and you're
going to get nucleotides. You know, it
it it it lots of steps along here, but
this is this this is the basic kind of
starting point for all of biosynthesis
in biochemistry today. And then you make
if you make fatty acids, they will sort
of spontaneously because of the
hydrophilic nature of uh their different
sizes, they will spontaneously form the
membrane if they're they're created.
>> as I say,
you know, Krebs cycle intermediates are
short chain carboxylic acids. A fatty
acid is a long chain. So you know, you
10, 12, 15 carbons in the chain instead
of four or five.
And they will spontaneously not just
alone usually, but if you've got other
long chain hydrocarbons mixed up with
them, then you will form a bilayer
membrane spontaneously and we've done
this in the lab. Uh and it's pretty
robust to you know, you can you can make
these things at 70 degrees, 90 degrees
centigrade uh across a range of pH from
around about pH 7 up to about pH 12.
Um and in the presence of ions like
calcium and magnesium and other salts
and so on. So you can and you make a a
vesicle with a bilayer membrane around
it which is this basically the same as a
cell membrane. Yeah. Uh they're
amazingly dynamic things. They're always
fusing with each other and breaking
apart, kind of fissioning, separating
into two or three and they they're very
very dynamic things under a microscope.
You could have had imagined that life is
this like
there's like Frankenstein like moment
where things zaps alive and then now
you've got life.
>> hate that as an idea, but go go on.
Yeah, so that's the alternative where
like the bolt of lightning makes these
organics etc.
And here you have the story
where
every life form you see is continuous
with something which is continuous with
something which is eventually just
continuous with
entirely spontaneous chemical reactions.
And so that they're just a very
interesting way to think about the
evolution of life.
>> Yes, I mean one thing, you know, a cell
is effectively it's reduced inside which
is to say the it's got electrons inside
and and outside it's relatively oxidized
and outside it's relatively pumped all
these protons out. It's acidic outside,
it's alkaline inside. It's it's uh it's
it's reduced inside. It's like the
earth. The earth is all the electrons
are in the iron in the core and the
mantle of the earth relatively alkaline
inside. That's why they're alkaline
fluids in these vents. The outside is
relatively oxidized. You were all the
CO2 in the ocean. So the cells are a
kind of little little battery with the
same structure as the earth. And if you
look in a hydrothermal system, the cell
membranes around you know, the the the
earth, the crust of the earth is like
the membrane and and and where you have
traffic going between the inside and the
outside is the hydrothermal systems. And
the pores in these hydrothermal systems
are little cell-like entities as well.
So you you keep having on multiple
scales this same kind of So the idea
that the earth is a giant battery that
produces little living cell mini
batteries. It's a rather beautiful idea.
I mean that you can't allow yourself to
get too hung up on a metaphor, but but
but it it's a beautiful image.
>> Yeah, 100% so just basically you've got
earth as this sort of like giant cell
and then this like from the hydrothermal
vent this little bubble pops
>> bubbling off mini Yeah. copies of the
earth. Yeah, that's such a fascinating
theory. So
the thing I want to understand is what
part of um
life the way it works now
is contingent and which would you expect
to be shared even if you found life on
another planet? And so it sounds like
you're saying, look, carbon, the
chemical profile, that it is just the
obvious candidate to build life on top
of.
Proton gradients, is there another way
you could build the sort of chemiosmotic
gradients that drive work, right? Like
we have other chemistry for batteries.
>> yes, you could use sodium ions instead
of protons, but but but but it's very
different because what you'd if you're
starting with with with carbon dioxide
and and the first thing to realize about
that is carbon is extremely good at the
chemistry that it does. It's forming you
know, very strong bonds with all kinds
of molecules so you can form complex
interesting molecules and you're
effectively I think of CO2 as a kind of
a Lego brick that you pluck out of the
air and you bind it onto something. You
can build things one brick at a time
that way and then you can build really
interesting complex molecules like DNA
and RNA from doing that.
Um you can't do that with silicon. So
you can you know, with intelligent
design you can make really complex AI
robots, whatever it may be, but the
whole thing requires humans to do it.
But if you're thinking about how would
life start on a planet where where where
there aren't you know, there isn't an
intelligent designer who's putting it
all together, you need molecules that
can do that kind of chemistry and CO2 is
the is the outstanding example. And
water is everywhere. Well, you know,
hydrogen, oxygen, these are all elements
that are very very common in the
universe. So you're going to keep on
getting this same kind of chemistry
everywhere. We know that there are from
from from um
from discoveries of exoplanets in recent
years, if you extrapolate how many we've
not seen yet, the number of wet rocky
planets or moons in in say the Milky Way
is probably in the order of 20, 30, 40
billion of them.
>> What fraction of them would you expect
to have a non-eukaryotic life? Uh I mean
I'll go I'll I'll take a punt here. I
would expect that if you've got these
same kind of conditions on a wet rocky
planet, you're going to be producing
these same kind of vents because it's
the same chemistry that's going to
happen. You're going to be dealing with
hydrogen.
>> are not contingent in your view? No, the
the the vents are produced by a mineral
called olivine which again is really
common in interstellar dust. And the
mantle of the earth is made of this
mineral called olivine. Uh and it will
react with water. And when it reacts
with water, um it's it's it's slow. If
you were to put a lump of olivine in a
bucket of water, you you won't see very
much. But if you're dealing with the
pressures down at the bottom of the
ocean and warmer temperatures and so on,
you're producing, you know, bucketloads
of of of hydrogen gas in alkaline
fluids. So that's what these
hydrothermal vents are. So any wet rocky
planet will produce these vents. We
There's evidence for them on Mars from
the early days of Mars when there were
oceans on Mars. There's evidence now on
moons wet the icy moons Enceladus and
and and Europa. Uh but you know, this is
going on in our own solar system right
now. Right. So if there's 20, 30 billion
Earth-like planets
which have the presumably some big
fraction of them have these vents if uh
they all have these rock formations. So
like is your view that a notable
fraction of them have life that also
operates
>> my view would be yes. Any wet rocky
planet would have a decent Yes. And if
you're starting with CO2 and hydrogen,
what I'm saying is the metabolism is
thermodynamically favored chemistry.
This same chemistry will just go on
happening because if you react hydrogen
with CO2 and then with another CO2
molecule the parts of the molecule that
are going to react are quite
predictable. So sorry, this is a naive
question, but what is the reason to
think that there's no alternative
chemistries which lead to alternative
metabolisms? Um perhaps under very
different conditions you could end up
with a but if you've got essentially
similar conditions you're
and the other the other thing is we know
that even with very different
chemistries you end up with basically a
similar subset of molecules. So from
from on the the kind of organics you see
on meteorites, utterly different
chemistry going on. You're dealing with
helium radicals to to but you're still
seeing amino acids and you're still
seeing nuclear bases and so on. So
there's a tendency, there's a kind of
these are molecules which are basically
stable and tend to be formed under a
wide range of conditions. So 20 billion
Earth-like planets with water and these
rocks in Not necessarily Earth-like, but
wet and rocky. If you just had to pull a
number out of nowhere and just say
this fraction have nucleotides, what
fraction would you say?
I would say a substantial fraction. Like
over 1%?
Yes. I mean I would I would I I would I
would I would imagine 50% or something.
I
I mean I'm putting you say pull a number
out of a hat. I'm doing exactly what
you're saying. I'm pulling a number out
of a hat. I think this kind of chemistry
is going to give you the same
nucleotides
repeatedly. Again, I know you're just
we're just you know, chatting here, but
like according to this story, pretty
sophisticated organics are extremely
abundant through the universe, right?
That's not to say they're collecting in
an ocean at a high concentration. What
you have in a hydrothermal vent is a
continuous through flow and and within
pockets within this vent, within the
pores within this vent, bound to the
walls pretty much within cells. So
within a vent system, you could have
very high concentrations of things
ultimately.
Um but but not necessarily in the oceans
or in the atmosphere or anywhere else.
Yeah, I I I guess you could have
prokaryotes
then who they just take over. I mean we
did have this, right? We did that they
kind of proliferated through the
oceans and changed the composition of
the atmosphere. So I mean not just the
atmosphere, but also the whole
the whole of geology. Hundreds of
minerals are basically product of life.
So your view is that the fundamental
bottleneck to that is eukaryotes are the
fundamental bottleneck.
You can go from
um
geochemistry to early life is easy.
Early life to just changing the entire
composition of the earth
through early prokaryotes is easy.
And if those two things are easy and
then you've got 10 billion planets in
the Milky Way that are going through the
middle stuff. Does it imply that there's
like on the order of 10 billion planets
that
>> I think you know to to to to to get to
nucleotides from nucleotides, you've
then got to get to RNA and DNA
and and ribosomes and you know molecular
machines. So there's a long gap there as
well. So just having nucleotides that's
that's a kind of it's a requirement to
get any further. I see. And then what
fraction would you
again you got to pull a number out of
the air?
Well, a lower fraction obviously. But um
Over a billion? I I mean I I would like
to be let's say optimistic. I would like
to think that that that these processes
are going to drive life into existence
on on on a substantial proportion of
these planets. Yeah.
>> Or moons. And I would expect that there
would be similarities in the genetic
code. I would expect that a lot of
metabolism would look similar. I would
expect that they would have a membrane
potential driving the kind of work
because it's fun you know if you're
dealing with CO2 and hydrogen, you've
got this same fundamental problem. How
do you make them react?
>> Yeah, yeah. But so basically there's
hundreds of millions of planets in the
Milky Way which like presumably has
something like ribosomes and Uh DNA and
all that stuff.
>> to RNA, yes. I I I That's my that's my
own thinking. I I don't I don't I I I
think
we're talking about serious planetary
driving forces driving fairly
deterministic chemistry that's going to
give you the same kind of intermediates
which are going to have the same kind of
chemistry the same kind of feedbacks
they're going to push things into
similar directions. Now the further from
CO2 fixation towards genetics you get uh
the the less similarity there's going to
be. So this happens to be the 101st
episode of the Thor Cast podcast. And
obviously that doesn't include you know
clips and shorts and the other content
that we put out on the channel. So at
this point it's gotten a bit tough to
keep track of all of this data. But
since Google Sheets has Gemini built in,
I was able to just throw our channel
data into a sheet and ask Gemini
whatever questions that I wanted
answered. For example, it's hard to
evaluate patterns for our full episodes
given that some of the clips were in the
same channel. So I just asked Gemini to
make a new column called content type.
And then it came up with a formula to do
this and to distinguish between the two
different types of content. Another
example, I was curious to see how many
episodes we had done about different
topics. And I didn't have any historical
tags that I'd made for this, but I was
just able to ask Gemini to use each
episode's description to assign topics
and then sum everything together to get
a breakdown by category. Gemini allows
you to turn these big chunks of
unstructured text into the type of data
that you can actually sum and count and
then use as the basis of different
formulas. Gemini in Sheets is now
available for Google Workspace users. I
found it helpful for my podcast and you
might find it helpful as well. All
right, back to Nick. This is not my
inclination, but if I was sort of a
god-fearing person Mhm.
I would hear this and I'd be like wow
this is a sort of vindication of
intelligent design where the laws of the
universe just favor this chemistry which
leads to life at least according to this
story so strongly that it's a hard of
hard to resist this formation. I'm
curious how you would you interpret that
interpretation.
>> I agree with you. It it I find it a
little
almost disturbing. Um and I I have to
say I'm not I'm not a a religious person
either, but I'm not I'm neither am I a I
don't object to religion. I'm not a I'm
not a militant atheist at all.
Um I I rather
I I I I like the fact that religions
have searched for meaning
searched for origins and I I have some
kind of fellow feeling with that search
and I I suppose truth in some sense in a
with a small t in my own case. But
insofar as this is is is is consistent
with the idea of a god, the god would be
a deist god that effectively set the
laws of the universe in motion and they
they're left to play out. Now you know
this is kind of Einstein's god really.
In terms of what most people understand
by god, I think most people look for
comforting god and are looking for
something which is meaningful to them
and who's being involved in humanity and
um so
this is a very cold kind of
god of thermodynamics
sets the laws of the universe in motion
reproducibly
gives rise to the same kinds of things.
Yes, you could interpret it in a kind of
theistic natural theistic way, but I
don't think many people would get that
much comfort or meaning from that way of
seeing the world.
>> Yeah, yeah. Okay, so very basic
question, but
if life is not only abundant but almost
inevitable in all these rocky planets,
then the bottleneck to not seeing aliens
everywhere
presumably is eukaryotes which lead to
complexity. Yeah. Well, there's probably
what more than one bottleneck, but
eukaryotes is in my own mind the big
one, yes. So it would actually be the
case that out of billions
of potential planets were they could
give rise to eukaryotes
only on Earth this is chance occurrence
happen. I wouldn't argue that. Okay. I
mean only on Earth, no I don't think so.
But but is is there I suppose what I
would dig my heels in a little bit is is
is there's a
the kind of Carl Sagan cosmological view
that that once you've got you know we're
talking about the inevitability almost
of life arising according to these laws
of chemistry and thermodynamics and so
on and you you get life and and then
is it going to roll on and inevitably
give rise to complex life and to humans
and to to to intelligence? Um
it's a it's a beautiful
thought. It would be lovely if that was
how the universe worked, but what we
have what we know on Earth is that you
have 2 billion years of stasis where you
and then and then this apparently
singular event where eukaryotes arose
and then another long gap before you get
to animals. And then if you know if you
roll back the clock 2 million years,
there aren't any humans around either.
So you know we're just we're just the
the the thing there. I see. Why is it
supposedly this hard to
have this
uh successful endosymbiotic event? Well,
there's there's multiple reasons. Um I
mean one of them is that that the
prokaryotes which is to say archaea and
bacteria, well they're pretty small
things. So just having another cell
inside you is already a difficult thing
to do. It's not and there there are no
there are occasional phagocytes in
bacteria that can engulf other cells,
but that that's pretty uncommon.
And once you've got these cells inside
you, you know that you may have that may
have happened scores of occasions.
There's some tentative evidence that
suggests that that archaea I mean
there's one nice example where the halo
archaea seem to have acquired more than
a thousand bacterial genes from the same
source implying perhaps they had got a
an endosymbiont that they then lost
later on. So the question is how how
often would it go wrong and and you lose
your endosymbionts and I I guess that
would be the more likely outcome is that
you pick up a bunch of genes and you
lose your endosymbionts it it simply
doesn't work out. Uh so so it's it's
hard to know exactly what are all the
bottlenecks here, but there there's been
some modeling work done to to see okay
you get an endosymbiont. Are you going
to grow faster if you don't have the
endosymbiont or you do have the
endosymbiont? And if you're the
endosymbiont, are you going to grow
faster if you're outside or if you're
inside? Under most conditions that that
these people have looked at there at the
Santa Fe. Um
the answer is well you you do better if
you're not part of the symbiosis. Only
under certain conditions will you do
better. So predictably the end point is
it doesn't work. Right. I guess
given how many bacteria and archaea
there are
you know
through Earth's history there's like
trillion trillion trillion of these
running around and there's many
situations in which there was an
endosymbiosis
and in only one case it succeeded. So
the the odds would have to just be like
remark it would have to be like
extremely extremely tough.
>> it's a vivid way of seeing it. Um
we know what bacteria and archaea look
like and
you know people have been studying these
things and finding new examples and
there's there's a group discovered 10
years ago called the Asgard archaea and
they're they're relatively
eukaryotic-like which is to say they've
got proteins in there and genes that
that are pretty similar to eukaryotic
ones.
And they're they're interesting cells.
They've got long processes and they can
possibly they can move vesicles around
inside them. So they're doing a few
eukaryotic things. But if you look at
their internal structure, it's not very
complex. It's nothing like a eukaryotic
cell. And if you look at their genome
size, it's basically a standard
prokaryotic genome size. You're talking
four 5,000 genes. So they're they're
these are these are these are not
eukaryotic by any stretch of the
imagination.
Um and then you look at a eukaryotic
cell and I said this at the beginning.
You you look at a plant cell or an
animal cell or a fungal cell or an alga
or amoeba under a microscope and they've
all got the same stuff and it's kind of
weird. Why would a single-celled alga
living in the ocean have all the same
kit that one of my kidney cells has?
Well, the easiest way to understand that
is to say well it wasn't adaptation to
an external environment to to a way of
life. It was adaptation to an internal
selection pressure. If you think about
it in terms of a kind of a battle
between between the host cell and the
endosymbiont for for for finding a way
of living together, you can argue for
the nucleus arising that there is all
kinds of genetic parasites coming out of
the mitochondria forcing you to do
something to protect your own genome. So
there's a you can construct a lot of
this history of eukaryo- eukaryogenesis
it would is called. So that you start
with simple cells with a cell inside and
you end up with with this same cell
structure everywhere all these
endomembrane systems and everything
else. Okay, so I guess the broader thing
we're trying to figure out here is if
this story is true, there's life
everywhere
but eukaryotes giving rise to
intelligent life which is about to go
you know explore the cosmos is as far as
we can tell happening only in one place
in our light cone. So why is that? And
now you could you could say well, look
it's the the bottleneck is the eukaryote
and um the it just like very hard to get
a successful endosymbiosis which then
continues over time.
But what is the fundamental problem this
is solving? We're solving the problem
that Large genomes. Exactly. So to to to
have a to to have a multicellular
organism where effectively you're
deriving from a single cell. And and
that restricts to the chances of
effectively all the cells having a
fight. There's plenty of examples of
multicellular slime molds for example
where they cells come together and they
can form structures like a stalk for
example
which which loosens spores into the
environment. But they basically fight
because they're genetically different to
each other. So you start with a single
cell and you you develop so there's less
genetic fighting going on between the
cells and there would be if they come
together.
But that means then if you want to have
complex functions if you want to have a
liver doing one thing and and kidneys
doing something else and the brain doing
something else.
All of the cells have to have the same
genes where you you you express this lot
in the liver and that lot in the brain.
So you must have a large genome. The
only way you can have a large genome is
by having mitochondria and having a
eukaryote cell. There are no examples of
this level of sophistication of a
multicellular bacterium. That's very
interesting that the reason you need a
large genome is actually just to put all
your eggs in one basket so that every
cell in the body feels incentivized to
make the the sort of the cell
>> it from fighting. Yeah, yeah. They make
the they're all incentivized to make the
germline continue. Okay, but the thing I
was getting at is like okay, the
eukaryote is solving large genome and
it's allowing the cell to get much
bigger. Why why are we so confident that
this is the only way this problem could
have been solved? It just seems like if
there's billions of planets which have
like gotten to the precursor stage here
none of them can find an alternative
solution to mitochondria for just
letting themselves get bigger. That is
belief. Yeah, I know where you're coming
from. It kind of makes me wonder whether
we're like because we've only observed
one way to solve the solution we're sort
of assuming that there must be only one
way to solve the solution problem.
Whereas the problem itself doesn't seem
like okay, you just want like a smaller
copy of your genome sitting next to the
site of respiration, right? That's like
the basic problem. Like there's no other
way to solve that.
>> Well, maybe there is but I I think we
have to look at the probability of
certain things happening. So so if you
want to have a giant bacterium
there are a bunch of giant bacteria
around on Earth. There's at least six to
seven different quite you know,
unrelated species that have
have evolved giant size. And the thing
that they all have in common is they
have what's called extreme polyploidy
which is to say they have literally tens
of thousands of copies of their complete
genome. Right. So maybe a small genome
but we're talking of three megabase
genome. So kind of 3,000 genes in it.
And you've got tens of thousands of
copies. Sometimes you know, the very
largest one have you know, 7 or 800,000
copies of their of their complete
genome. The the energy requirements for
copying all of them and expressing all
of those genomes are colossal. Um what
we have with an endosymbiosis
we still have extreme polyploidy but
we've whittled away all the genes that
you don't need. So it's an a symbiosis
is based on effectively complementarity.
Yeah.
>> That you've got a symbiont that's doing
something for the host cell and the host
cell that's taking something or giving
something back to the endosymbiont. So
it's a it's it's a kind of a
relationship which is based on mutual
needs.
>> Right. One of them becomes much smaller
and that allows the other one to become
much larger.
>> Right. So a symbiosis will do it. Now
there could be multiple ways of having a
symbiosis but there's there's no there's
no examples on it. There's all of these
examples of
very large bacteria and they all have
extreme polyploidy. None of them have
come up with a complex trafficking
network where you you effectively take
things in and you ship it over there.
>> Yeah. There's just not enough genetic
space to do that.
>> sure I answer the feature request
correctly
it's basically like
you want
a smaller copy of the genome that is
only relevant to respiration sitting at
sitting across the entire membrane and
many copies of it sitting across the
entire membrane.
I guess I'm just it seems hard for me to
You're incredulous that this this same
thing will be repeated. Yeah.
>> on like the billions of planets because
if there was another way to solve it
then what you would expect is that as
soon as you get to the stage of
prokaryotes
that have other niches that they could
colonize if only they could drive
towards complexity this would somehow be
solved and then you'd have eukaryotes
dot dot dot intelligence I mean a couple
of things I'd say. Number one there's a
there's a thing called Ogel's second
rule which is that evolution is cleverer
than you are.
So yeah, of course I cannot say that
there's no other way that it could
possibly happen. But it's also
hand-waving to say oh, you know,
evolution is so clever the universe is
so big there's got to be another way
that it can happen. Okay, you know,
engage your brain and tell me is how
it's going to work because I I'm you
know, I
I cannot say it's the only way it could
possibly happen. But what I've said is
that there's a you know, wet rocky
planets are common they're everywhere.
You're going to have these same
serpentinizing things. You're going to
have CO2. You're going to have a similar
biochemistry. You're going to give rise
to bacterial cells that have got a
charge on their membrane. That
constrains them and every example that
we know on Earth where they seem to have
got bigger there's a there's a there's a
constraint that probably
probabilistically happens every time.
Yeah. That they always end up with
extreme polyploidy and they don't end up
with sophisticated transport networks.
So that's not to say it's got to happen
that way every time. Maybe there's a way
around it but it's not an easy way
around it because they haven't done it
regularly on Earth. They haven't done it
at all on Earth. The only occasion where
it worked on Earth was where they came
up with eukaryotes. That's not to say
it's the only possible way of doing it
but if you try and dissect what are the
alternatives I can't think of any
alternatives. Okay, I'm limited. I can't
think of any. But but but you know, if
you think there are some then you tell
me what they might be and you test them.
So
it's you know, there's there's a there's
a level and I get this a lot and it's
fair enough because if I just if I
assert to you that life's going to be
this way somewhere else in the universe
and you know, I grew up watching uh
you know, Star Wars and Star Trek and I
and and and and reading Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy. I love the idea
that the universe is full of all kinds
of stuff as much as anybody. Um so I
don't like
my position of saying actually it's
quite limited and and you're going to
see the same kind of things elsewhere.
Um
it's not a position that I I
you know, dreamt of having or anything.
It's just a position that I've been
forced into by everything that I've
learned about life on Earth. Now maybe
I'm just wrong but but
I suppose if you if you simply say ah,
you're you're limited by your
imagination you're wrong cuz you just
can't think of it. Well, that's not
science anymore. Now we're talking about
you know,
just imagination and hand-waving but
it's not science. So so I'm giving
reasons why probabilistically it's going
to be this way. I would what I would say
is if you've got you know, a thousand
planets with life on maybe life is going
to be the same way 999 out of a thousand
times cuz it's going to be carbon based.
It's going to be water. It's going to be
cells. It's going to be charges. It's
going to be hydrogen and CO2 and you're
going to face the same constraints. But
maybe one other occasion is something
completely different that I never
thought of under very different
conditions. But there's a kind of a
probabilistic thing that you know,
carbon is so common. Water is so common.
You are going to keep seeing the same
constraints again and again. Hm. If it's
the case that a significant fraction of
rocky planets should have
at least organics and cells and so forth
it feels like we should be able to learn
pretty soon whether this story is kind
of correct, right? Because obviously
if that part ends up being true and also
we don't see eukaryotes elsewhere then
the whole picture is lent a lot more
credence. But like we
I don't know. Are we about to go to a
couple moons and see if we can find some
organics there and so forth?
>> That may take us a while but yeah, we
already know that there are organics in
so on Enceladus for example one of the
moons of Saturn
when Cassini flew by
years ago there are kind of plumes
coming through cracks in the ice of
water but with organics dissolved in in
in the water and hydrogen and you know,
organic molecules. pH is around about
eight or nine or something. So it
implies that underneath that frozen
surface which people say is about 5 km
thick underneath that there's a liquid
ocean. Underneath that there are
hydrothermal systems producing alkaline
fluids which have made the oceans
alkaline and it's the same kind of
chemistry going on. So we know there's
organics in these plumes. We don't know
what's under the ice. Um I do think that
the incentives to go to these places and
drill into the ice and have a look will
get the better of us. Yeah. There will
always be people saying oh, we shouldn't
introduce bacteria from our own system
into there. I would have said you know,
bacteria from the Earth would probably
survive extremely well in a place like
Enceladus. So it'd be lovely to know.
Yes, I
and I'm all in favor really of
exploration. Labelbox has this massive
network of subject matter experts who
they call aligners to help them generate
data for training and evaluating
frontier models. In order to help prep
for this episode I asked Labelbox to
connect me with one of their chemistry
experts for a quick tutoring session. I
got to chat with Neil who's a researcher
that's currently working on chemistry ML
models. So how did the first cell
division happen? I suppose and this is
just me speculating here but in these
hydrothermal vents you've got water
flowing down. You've got hydrogen
pumping up. And this water is not just
going to be flowing in a completely
linear fashion. There's going to be some
shear. There's going to be some side to
side movement. So I suppose perhaps you
could begin to consider sharing some of
the cells, splitting them. Ah. And I
remember him saying that like the the
first version of division might have
been like membranes naturally will split
the same way like a bubble will split if
it gets too big.
>> Yes. Neil quizzed me on my understanding
of redox chemistry. The same way that he
interrogates models to make sure that
they are developing a non-superficial
understanding of all the scientific
topics. Labelbox has experts like Neil
in a bunch of different domains from
chemistry, obviously, to math, coding,
even creative fields. Learn more at
cash.
Help me understand
how replicators arise in this world
because you've got these independent
pores
and they're each individually
accumulating their own organics through
these spontaneous processes,
but initially, at least, there's no
shared inheritance. It's not like if
there was a very successful pore, it
then causes there to be more pores that
are exactly like it.
>> what I would call proto-cells inside
these pores. So, you think think that
you're the organics that you're making
are self-organizing.
A fatty acid bilayer membrane will form.
Um what you really need for positive
feedbacks is to be making the organics
inside this proto-cell and for that
proto-cell to grow and to make a copy of
itself.
Now, it will make a copy of itself
because the chemistry if the chemistry
is deterministic, it says this is the
chemistry you're going to get. If you
drive that chemistry through by the
pressure of hydrogen in the system,
you're just going to make twice as many
molecules and they're going to divide in
two and now you've got two proto-cells.
So, there's a form of heredity to that
which is say they get the same molecules
because that's effectively all you're
allowed to do. And so sorry, then what's
happening is that so the thing buds off
and then like settles into another pore?
Yes. I see. Okay, got it. And this
happens like relatively early in this
process. Yes. And so the rise of
replicators happens relatively early. I
would hesitate to use the word
replicator here. These are growing, I
would say growing proto-cells that are
effectively
um making more of themselves. You could
call it a replicator, but I would prefer
to use the word replicator for something
more like RNA, which would be the
conventional term for a replicator where
you're literally replicating the exact
sequence of this RNA.
>> at what point do we get to the genes eye
point of view where the gene is the
coherent unit of replication?
>> The sooner the better.
Uh which is to say you you if you've got
this deterministic chemistry which is
going to drive growth and make make more
cells,
it's also a dead end. You can't do
anything else. You're entirely dependent
on the environment. You can't you can't
kind of evolve into something more
complex. You can you to some extent you
can, but basically you're always going
to get the same in the same environment
will always give you the same thing. As
soon as you start introducing random
bits of RNA into this, uh then you've
got what you'd call evolvability, which
is to say you can begin to resist the
environment. You can begin to do things
which are not just dictated by the
environment. You can evolve and change
and lead the events in the end and do
other things.
Uh so as soon as you've got genes,
you've got the potential to to do almost
anything. If you've got naked bits of
RNA, what tends to happen is they they
they're selected for their replication
speed. They they they just go on making
copies of themselves. They don't become
more complex. They don't start encoding
metabolism. They just go on copying
themselves and and and it's a dead end.
>> Yeah. Um if you're trapping them inside
growing proto-cells, then effectively
they're sharing the same fate and if
some of them are capable of making that
proto-cell grow faster, um then then
they will get more copies of themselves
because they're inside this proto-cell.
The proto-cell's growing faster. It
makes a copy of itself and it's still
associated. So so you've got actually
selection as we know it in cells today
where
where the replicator are the genes, but
the system which is being reproduced is
the cell. So uh your sort of
mitochondria first viewpoint helps
explain why there's two sexes. Maybe you
can recapitulate that argument, but I'm
curious if um
if there was a world where prokaryotes
had evolved sex,
do you think they would have likely
evolved just one sex? Uh I'm going to
unpack that a little bit because so so
so so so what have mitochondria got to
do with sex? So, what they have to do
with sex is is effectively the female
sex and this goes even for single cells,
things that don't have any, you know,
obvious differences between gametes,
which is to say they don't have oocytes
and sperm or anything like that. You
know, you produce little motile gametes
that look more like sperm than anything
else. Both sexes would do that. But
by definition, the female sex passes on
the mitochondria and the male does not.
Uh and that's a kind of that's a that's
an approximation. It's not always true.
There's there's exceptions to that rule,
but it's a kind of a rule of thumb in
biology that the females pass on
the mitochondrial DNA.
Um so why would that happen? With sex,
what you're doing is you're increasing
the variance in the in the nuclear
genome and you're subjecting that to
selection and the the winners are coming
through that and and and everything
which is worse than it would have been
gets eliminated by selection. So, you're
effectively you're increasing variance
on nuclear genes
the genomes and and then and then and
and then selecting for what works. With
the mitochondria, they're not doing
they're not they're passing on asexually
down the generations. Uh there's a very
small genome, but there's multiple
copies of it. Um and so the question is,
well, how do you keep that clean? How do
you prevent that from degrading and
degenerating over time? Because if
you've got let's say if you've got 100
copies of mitochondrial DNA and two of
them acquire mutations, but you've still
got 98 which are doing their job fine.
What's the penalty for those two
mutations? Not very much. You'll hardly
notice them. Yeah. So so so now you
acquire another couple of mutations and
you you can degenerate over time. It's a
process called Muller's ratchet, but
it's basically it's it's
these mutations are kind of somewhat
screened from selection by being
compensated for by clean copies that you
have of other other copies.
So, how do you get rid of those
mutations that are building up over
time? Well, the answer is you what you
need to do is increase variance of
mitochondrial genes. What you need to do
is effectively segregate into these
cells all the mutants and into those
ones all the wild type ones.
>> So, you can do that by by multiple
rounds of cell division, but it helps if
you've got two sexes that effectively
only one sex passes on the mitochondria.
So, you're already sampling. So, you're
already increasing the variance
and and you're increasing visibility to
selection. So, you're basically it's
about it's about the quality of
mitochondrial genes. Can can you help me
understand why it's the case that
uniparental inheritance of mitochondria
helps increase variance?
Because of so so so we're talking about
variance between cells. So, if you
imagine that you have a hundred a
hundred cells
um and you they all come from the same
parent, let's say, and you randomly gave
each cell uh
you know, if you give all the all the
mitochondria that you have kind of
straight into a single cell without
without changing any of the ratios
there, then then it's exactly the same
as you are. It's it's fully clonal. But
if you give if you take a small
subsection of those and you say you take
a random 10% and you give 10% to this
one, a random 10% to that one, a random
10% to this one, randomly, this cell is
going to happen to have got all the good
copies and this cell is going to happen
to have got all the bad copies. And now
you subject these hundred cells to
selection and say, "How are you doing?"
And the one that got all the good
copies, that does well. That that that
gets on. So, so what you're doing is
increasing the variance between this
kind of next generation of cells. So,
the ones that got all the mutants, they
they get hit.
And the ones that got all the clean
copies, they do all right. The the
parent had got both the mutations and
the clean copies, but how do you you
know, how do you distinguish between
them? Well, so so it's about sampling,
basically. And uniparental inheritance,
which is to say it's a form of sampling.
You're taking the mitochondria only from
one of the two parents. So, you're not
mixing up mutations that the parent both
parents had. You're kind of taking a
subset. So, you're you're always
increasing variance between the daughter
cells
and and uniparental inheritance is
basically giving you a subset. So then
the question of why there's two sexes,
well, you explained why there's this
evolutionary need for only one parent to
pass on the mitochondria. So, there's at
least two niches. One is pass on the
mitochondria and one is don't pass on
the mitochondria. So, once you've
established those two, then you can ask
the question, why aren't there more than
two sexes?
And then there then you can just say,
well,
there would just be a repetitive one of
these two. These are the two fundamental
>> more complex, but but I mean, the thing
about two sexes is it's in you could say
it's the worst of all possible worlds.
>> Right. Uh so again, if you kind of
let's take it away from humans so we can
be dispassionate about it. You you got
you got these, you know, single cells
critters swimming around
and they're all producing gametes and
the gametes look the same as each other
and and they'll fuse in the same way as
sex and they'll line up the chromosomes.
They you know, they basically do exactly
the same thing that we do, but on a
single cell scale.
But but having two sexes means that you
you can only mate with 50% of the
population. The other 50% is the same
sex as you and and it's not going to
accept your your gametes. If you had
three sexes or four sexes, then you'd be
able to mate with a larger proportion of
the population. And some fungi, they
don't really have they they still have
two sexes, but they have mating types as
well and you can have 27,000 mating
types in some fungi, which is all about
outbreeding so you can mate with just
about anything, but you still
>> campuses today, you know, they're
probably getting some portion of that.
Oh yeah.
I'm feeling fungal.
Yes.
Um so so two sexes then in that sense is
the worst of all possible worlds. You
can only mate with If you had only one
sex, if everyone was a hermaphrodite,
you could mate with everybody.
Uh and if you had three sexes, you could
mate with two-thirds of the population
and so on. So, why two? Well, this this
fundamental
difference that one is passing on the
mitochondria and the other is not.
Beyond that, if you've got multiple
mating types, you still have one passes
on the mitochondria and the other one
doesn't. So, in these fungi that have
all of these mating types, there's a
kind of a pecking order.
The the dominant one will pass on the
mitochondria and the less dominant one
doesn't pass on the mitochondria. So,
you end up with really complex systems
and you can imagine that it's pretty
hard to enforce this. It's pretty
stuff can go wrong. The more complex the
system is, the more it will go wrong.
So, I guess in that sense, why do you
end up with two sexes? It's partly
minimization of error.
You have this really interesting
discussion about how this not only
explains why there's two sexes, but the
particular differences in why eggs and
sperm develop the way they do, why
there's different amounts of
replications before they are mature,
etc.
I wonder if we can recapitulate that.
>> Yeah, so as soon as you've got this
fundamental difference even in
single-celled creatures that one of the
sexes passes on the mitochondria and the
other one doesn't.
>> Yeah. Uh so males do not pass on their
mitochondria. And and and then this is
beginning to explain, you know,
differences in multicellular organisms
between the sexes, between the nature of
the germ line. So
>> Yeah. in some sense male men do not
really have a germ line in the sense
that that women have a germ line. So in
the in the in the in the in the female
germ line you you make these oocytes and
you put them on ice effectively. You you
you look after them. You you you you you
you switch them off as much as you can.
You try and protect them from mutations.
Um you you mollycoddle them effectively.
Whereas whereas men just mass-produce
sperm full of mutations.
>> Mhm. I mean there's there's a lovely uh
phrase from James Crow, uh who's a
geneticist, who said there's no greater
genetic health hazard in the population
than fertile old men. Mhm. Um uh so so
why would you go on mass-producing sperm
all the time? Well, part of it is you
don't have to pass on the mitochondria.
So you're freeing yourself up to
mass-produce sperm and then you've got
the same thing as that. Some of them are
full of mutations, but a lot of them
aren't. You mass-produce them and and
and you know, the chances are it's going
to work out okay.
Because the ones that can swim best, for
example, are the ones that are more
likely to That's not strictly true, but
you can imagine it along those lines.
But in the case of oocytes, in the case
of the egg cells, um you're passing on
those mitochondria. You don't want to be
accumulating mutations in that
mitochondrial DNA. You want to you want
to switch them off as much as possible,
keep them on ice as much as possible. So
that very much the differences between
uh how the sexes end up uh kind of
becoming different to each other.
>> Right.
>> Boils down to what are what are the
constraints on on on on on on your
reproductive system.
>> Yeah. Okay, so let's talk about the Y
chromosome, which is also not
recombined.
Um now just the same way that female egg
cells
try to minimize the amount of
duplications in order to preserve the
quality of the mitochondrial DNA and
prevent errors, why isn't the same thing
happening with the Y chromosome? Why
shouldn't all the sperm duplication be
resulting in all kinds of errors in the
Y chromosome that
>> Well, it does.
>> Okay. Uh uh uh and the Y chromosome is
is degenerate and and
I want to make that the title. Yeah, but
I mean there are you know, there are
some things that have lost their Y
chromosome altogether. Mhm. Uh and and
they still have sexes because it's not
strictly dependent on the Y chromosome.
Mhm. Um I mean again, if you look at
what determines sexes across the whole
canvas of evolution, it's kind of weird
because
amphibians, for example, have
temperature-dependent sex determination.
So males would develop at a higher
temperature than females or sometimes
the other way around. And and you know,
birds have different sex chromosomes to
to mammals, for example. So sex
chromosomes have evolved on multiple
different occasions.
Uh what is what's the Y chromosome
doing? Well, the Y chromosome is
basically encoding a growth factor and
that growth factor switches on other
growth factors. And the the earliest
difference that you could tell between
the two sexes in in in embryonic
development is is not the activation of
the Y chromosome, the SRY gene. It's
actually the growth rate. Um and and
there's there there was a there was a a
woman at at UCL, where I am, called
Ursula Mittwoch, who spent her career
she she had about 15 nature papers in
the 1960s. She worked on this this these
kind of questions. And she saw the
growth rate as the common denominator
that the Y chromosome is basically
saying grow fast. Why would he grow
fast? Well, in part you can grow fast
you you don't have any constraints on
trashing your own mitochondria Mhm.
because you're not passing them on. So
you can grow fast and there'll be an
advantage to growing fast. If you're if
you're a male, you you're you're going
to get the resources you grow faster. If
you're a female, you don't want to grow
so fast cuz you you need to effectively
cordon off your germ line to preserve
the oocytes for the next generation.
Until you've done that, you don't want
to trash your mitochondria. So you
you've got a you know, a delay phase
before you you can start growing fast.
>> Interesting. Is this how women live
longer? Uh Ursula Mittwoch argued that
that was exactly the case. Mhm. Um we
don't know for a fact that that's true,
but it is is is quite common that
females live longer than males, not just
in humans, but but in you know, in
Drosophila as well. They do usually.
Suppose that evolution on humans just
continued naturally for the next billion
years.
And you know, we didn't have AGI and uh
human gene editing, etc.
Is the equilibrium that you'd anticipate
that the Y chromosome would then just
fade away altogether and there'd be some
other way of determining sex and
sex-dependent characteristics?
>> are. And it has disappeared altogether
in in in some species.
>> Mhm. And usually what you retain is one
gene, which which which causes a
different rate of growth. I see. Uh so
so really the the Y chromosome, yes,
it's degenerate, it's lost most of its
genes. Um
the thing about Muller's ratchet, which
is the degradation of of things uh when
when you don't have sex or you don't
have any recombination,
there's there's two factors that
influence it. One of them is the
population size. So in bacteria, if
you've got a small population and
they're not sexual, then you you
accumulate mutations in that population.
But if you've got a much larger
population,
>> Mhm. the closer you kind of get towards
an infinitely large population, they're
not all going to accumulate the same
mutations. And so the population as a
whole is going to be fine. Um and this
this kind of goes back decades in
population genetics. But the other thing
which is less less explored in
population genetics is the size of the
genome.
So so if you with bacteria, if you
increase their genome size up to
eukaryotic size genomes, you can't
maintain a larger genome. You'll
accumulate mutations in that genome and
it'll shrink again. Mhm. And with the
with the Y chromosome, yes, it's shrunk.
It's a tiny It's a tiny chromosome in
comparison with all of the rest. So so
it's really is how many genes can you
maintain in a good state. And with the Y
chromosome, basically you only need a
couple of genes in there. They basically
is is the SRY gene is saying grow
faster.
>> I see. And you only need that to remain
functional. And then selection at the
level of fertile or infertile men will
kind of weed out the ones that have got
a non-functional SRY gene. So
Interesting. it's not as if you've got a
patchwork of mutation. You can afford to
degenerate your Y chromosome down to
almost nothing and you'll still be
functional.
>> And I mean it's quite interesting
because
you were saying that the same thing
happened to the mitochondrial
DNA as well.
>> genome. And has shrunk over time
starting from the original bacteria that
was engulfed.
>> It it's gone down from say three or four
thousand genes to in our own case 37
genes. So it's you know, you cannot
sustain a large genome if you're inside.
You know, I said I said but population
size matters. If you're a mitochond If
you were a free-living bacterium living
out there in the wild with a population
of a million and now you shelter inside
another cell and it's a small cell. Now
you've got a population of five. Yeah.
Um so so you will accumulate mutations
and you can't resist them. So you'll
lose genes. So your genome shrinks.
That's what happened to the
mitochondria. You just can't maintain a
bacterial-size genome. So maybe worth
explaining why is the case that sex is
preferable to lateral gene transfer in
the sense of being the systematic
pooling and parallel search across gene
space. So if um
if there is this advantage of sex and
then bacteria have some antecedent to
it, why didn't they just get the whole
thing? Is it just that it's not
compatible with their size? I I think
they had no need for it.
>> Mhm. Um so so what they do is lateral
gene transfer is basically you you pick
up random bits of DNA from the
environment. It can be a bit more
sinister than that. You can kill a cell
next to you and take its DNA and load
that in. It does happen, but for the
most part you pick up bits of DNA
>> Yeah. from the environment. Usually
small pieces, usually kind of one gene's
worth or something. Uh and you'd only do
that if you're a bit stressed. If if if
things aren't going well for you, you
you you you you will then pick up bits
of DNA, bind it into your genome and
hope for the best. And I guess for most
creatures most of the time it's not
going to work, but for one of them it
does and then they will they will take
over. And so it it kind of speeds up
adaptation uh to a to a changing
environment.
>> Mhm. So why are why are they only using
one gene? There's two ways of seeing
this. You you you've got a a
bacterial-size genome. It's pretty
small.
>> Yeah. Um you're going to replicate
faster if you keep that genome small.
It's a kind of a disadvantage to have a
big unwieldy genome. Eukaryotes have
that and it's kind of an interesting
question why would you have such a big
unwieldy genome? It takes longer to copy
and longer, you know, bacteria are
really streamlined. They get rid of
genes they don't need and then they can
grow faster. But now the conditions
change. Now you need this gene. So what
do you do? You pick it up. You just pick
up random genes and hope for the best.
Pick up the right one and off you go
again. So so bacterial genome sizes are
small. They've got what you'd say is a
is a small genome, but then a large pan
genome, which is a kind of the all of
the genes they have access to. So an E.
coli cell might have three or four
thousand genes in a single cell, but
access to 30 or 40,000 genes.
>> What is keeping the metagenome around?
Why is it why why doesn't everybody just
converge to this streamlined thing that
is needed for the the current
environment?
>> think what keeps the the metagenome
around is is the fact that different
strains of E. coli, whatever bacteria
they may be, are living in different
environments. So you could have a
commensal bacteria living in your gut.
You could have bacteria E. coli living
on your skin, very different
environment. Uh you can then have
non-commensal pathogenic E. coli, which
are you know, behaving differently
again. They can differ in 50% of their
genome. So you've got all of these
things going on side by side. And they
can all borrow genes from each other.
And this is basically within the same
species, whatever species exactly means
with bacteria. It doesn't quite have a
meaning. Mhm. Um so so so this is the
the kind of dynamic of bacterial
evolution is they retain small genomes
with access to large pan genomes and
they're forever borrowing matching and
so on.
And and they they they effectively
remain competitive by keeping their own
genome pretty small. And then eukaryotes
kind of threw all of that out and got
larger genomes. And then the question
is, well, if you try and do that with a
large genome and eukaryotic sized
genome, and then you go on picking up
little bits of DNA from the environment,
the chances of you replacing the right
gene gets lower. I see. So, it just
becomes less and less efficient the
bigger your genome is. So, by the time
you get to eukaryotes, they have a large
genome. Why do they have a large genome?
I would say it's because you acquire
this endosymbiont and they become the
mitochondria. Now you have a lot more
energy available. There's all kinds of
reasons why eukaryotes will tolerate a
larger genome, but the bottom line is
you've got the energy to do something
with it, which bacteria never really
had. And so so now lateral gene transfer
is just not good enough to maintain this
larger genome. You're going to have to
do something more systematic. So, you
pull on an entire genome, you line
everything up, you cross over between
them. Now it's systematic, it's
reciprocal, and you can you can maintain
the quality of genes
in a much larger genome. So, bacteria
never had the need to do that. Right. As
I was reading your book, just to ease my
own ignorance, I was like trying to come
up with an analogy.
Um and so, please let me know in which
ways it's naive. And also, thanks for
tolerating all my other naive questions
today. But um you know, here in Silicon
Valley, maybe an analogy that will work
for us is to think about, let's say, a
GitHub repository.
And then I'm already out of my depth
now.
Basically, you just have this code base
and then you have ways in which you do
version control.
Yeah. So,
the usual way this is done, and this may
be analogous to sexual recombination, is
that somebody makes what is called the
make a new branch. In that branch, they
might make changes which are organized
next to the function that they're trying
to change. And then so, when the
maintainer is looking at the code, they
can see here was what the original code
was at this point. Here's the
modification to that point of code, and
you see the diff, and then you can merge
it back if it seems sensible. And so,
the analogy here might be you know,
sexual recombination that's organized
along the relevant gene, and you see
this allele, you see that allele. And
then I guess evolution here is the
maintainer, which is then driving one of
them to fixation.
The analogy for asexual reproduction,
just cloning with mutation, would be,
okay, you fork the repository, then you
make a random change. You just change
some random variable, you change a word,
you change a bit.
And almost every single time, this will
be deleterious. Yeah.
And even when it's not deleterious,
uh
there's no merge functionality. So,
these different you've got millions of
repositories that are then then spawning
millions of other repositories. And even
if some improvement has been made on one
one of them, there's no systematic way
in which the improvements can be merged
together. I mean, it sounds quite
similar. Yeah. And then finally, lateral
gene transfer. So, here the analogy
might be,
okay, so
you've got one repository for, let's
say, editing web pages, and another
repository for controlling airline
software.
And what you just do is you take a
random 500 line sequence in this
uh web page editing software, and you
just put it in a random point in the
airplane management software. And
there's no
systematic organization of like, here's
where the relevant functionality is, and
here's like Well, there is a bit, which
is to say, with lateral gene transfer,
you would normally match the ends to
something you've got already. Mhm. So, I
don't know enough about coding to to to
to give a to to give a comparable
example, but effectively, uh you would
be picking up a module which had had
some resemblance in terms of, okay, it
fits into this part of the code. Yeah.
Uh so, you'd only put that in, and it
may or may not be useful there, but it's
not just completely random. It's kind of
it's it's plugged into a place where you
know you have something like that that
used to be there or could be there. So,
it's it's not it's not just random, but
at the same time, it's uh you you don't
know what you put in. So, then I guess
honestly, I don't really have good
intuition for why
lateral gene transfer does not produce
similar benefits
to recombination. It's really just a
scaling thing. If you if you pick up a
random piece of DNA, you've got a you
you you've got a genome which is 10
times larger,
then you know, how fast can you pick up
DNA from the environment? You know,
you'd have to pick up 10 times as much
to to to do that. Do you do you have the
capacity to pick up 10 times as much?
And
and there's also a a penalty for doing
it, which is to say,
like a mutation, you've got no idea what
you're plugging in. It could be almost
anything. You know where you're plugging
it, you're plugging it in the right
place, but what's in in that cassette,
you don't really know. So, the more you
do of it, the more you will degenerate
yourself as well.
Um so, there's there's kind of costs and
benefits to to to doing it. If you're
running a frontier technology company,
you know how essential it is to recruit
the world's best talent. But this
requires navigating the Byzantine US
immigration system. Not only do you not
have the time to deal with this
yourself, you just don't have the tacit
knowledge to maximize the probability of
success. But given how critical
exceptional talent is, you can't take
any risks with visa approval. You need
to work with the best.
Lighthouse handles everything better and
faster than you possibly could. And they
do it all with minimal input from you.
Lighthouse knows the nooks and crannies
of the immigration machine. They know
how to frame publications and awards, or
how to structure comp comparisons versus
benchmarks, and how to put everything
together into the most compelling story
possible. And they've even optimized the
tiny details, like the tone they use
when they draft support letters to help
US immigration officials understand the
importance of tech and startups.
Companies like Cursor, Together AI, and
Physical Intelligence are all already
working with Lighthouse. You can join
them by visiting
lighthousehq.com/employers.
Okay, so maybe to close this off,
what is the um
experiment or method of
interrogation which would give us the
most amount of information
about the this story?
Yeah, I mean, there's so many aspects to
this story. There's so many possible
answers I could give there. I mean, in
terms of
eukaryotes, giant bacteria, the
likelihood of life, I think there's a a
lot depends on observation. We simply
don't know enough about what's out
there.
And so, it's not necessarily
experimentation simply you know, if I
assert that giant bacteria are always
going to have
you know, extreme polyploidy with
multiple copies of their genome, you
find an example that's not like that,
and already my ideas are breaking up.
So,
useful to know. For the origin of life,
you know, I really wish I could come up
with a convincing reason why I should go
down in a submersible to a deep sea
hydrothermal system like Lost City. I
would love to go to Lost City. Um but
but the trouble is that
ocean chemistry is completely different
now to what it was 4 billion years ago.
It's now full of oxygen. It's full of
bacteria and things as well. But the
ocean chemistry is is different because
there's oxygen, there's no iron, there's
no nickel in the oceans. Uh so, you can
go to a vent like Lost City, and the
walls are not made of catalytic minerals
anymore, they're made of aragonite and
and brucite. So, kind of
calcium carbonate and and magnesium
hydroxides and things like that. Um
Uh and so, the chemistry it can do is
very different, and there's lots of
bacteria living there. So, I would gain
beyond just the sheer
amazement of seeing it,
there's not a lot it would be able to
tell me. Um
So so so, what we're actually doing is
experiments in a lab in a in an
anaerobic glove box where you exclude
the oxygen so you can do these
experiments in reacting hydrogen and
CO2. How how many of the molecules in in
biochemistry can we produce that way?
And it's slow and laborious, and you get
small amounts, and and sometimes you get
contaminations, and sometimes you have
to start all over again. And it you
know, it's it's it's slow work. Um but
it it's it's moving forward. It's not
just us, either. I mean, there's other
groups around the world. Um so so,
Joseph Moran's group, for example, has
done a lot of really nice biochemistry
along along these lines.
Um so so, that's kind of moving forward,
but I I think we're talking decades
before we're we're getting to the level
where we can say, right, we can drive
flux through all of metabolism, and
here's the set of conditions that will
do it. Uh certainly
some years. There are big crux points
like making purine nucleotides, where
there's 12 steps in this synthetic
pathway, and it all the intermediates
are unstable and break down easily. It
It's been done
in
things like methanol, so not in water.
In water, stuff breaks down. So, what
we're trying to do is is difficult. So,
will I I I believe I think we'll get
there, which is why we're trying to do
it. But maybe we won't, in which case
again, the hypothesis is wrong. We
you've got to wake up every morning and
think, you know, the hypothesis could be
wrong. It's it's beautiful, it might it
makes sense, but you know, there's so
many beautiful ideas killed by ugly
facts. So, there's no good believing
that you're right. You've got to believe
you're probably wrong, and keep going
anyway. And then the other the other
thing which I'm excited about at the
moment is is is work on anesthetics and
mitochondria. It turns out, I heard this
from from a guy called Luca Turin a few
years ago now,
um who pointed out to me that
anesthetics affect mitochondria. I had
no idea that anesthetics affect
mitochondria. Well, they do. We've been
doing experiments on it, and and and it
seems
not fully established as this yet, but
it does seem as if their main effect is
mitochondria. And and anesthetics work
on all kinds of things, including things
like amoeba.
So, it's already saying, it doesn't
prove anything, but it's beginning to
say, well, if you can make an amoeba
unconscious, then is it Was it conscious
before? Well, not as we understand
consciousness.
But, the way we would understand
consciousness is really about neural
nets,
nervous system, and and all the
complexity of human consciousness.
That's what we primarily think about.
But, there's a deep problem uh which
which goes back I mean, it's it's the
mind-body problem, but but it was it was
framed by David Chalmers as the hard
problem of consciousness, which boils
down as my understanding of this is more
or less, we don't know what a feeling is
in physical terms. So, you can
understand the information processing of
a neural network, but what actually if
you feel miserable, or you feel pain,
uh or you feel love, or whatever it may
be, what actually is that in the
chemistry of a system? Uh
and I suppose the problem is that you
have all of these neural nets firing,
and some of them are conscious, where
they're aware that
of of what we're thinking about. And
others which seem to have all the same
properties in terms of their neurons,
they have synapses, they have
neurotransmitters, they depolarize, they
pass on an action potential, but we're
not conscious of it. It's is is
non-conscious information processing.
So, so there's this question, okay, so
if if anesthetics affect things that
don't have neural nets,
uh and and and feelings are
something that we can't define in terms
of a neural net, could it be
that feelings are somehow linked more
broadly to to life? Um So, why would
they be? What would have So, so, so
again, the way I think about this is as
as an evolutionary biologist. So, the
first question is,
would we think that
uh that that that feelings are real? I
would say, yes. Uh do we think that they
evolved? I would say, yes. I think any
evolutionary biologist would say, yes to
those those questions. Um if it's if
it's real and it's evolved, then natural
selection must be able to see it and act
on it in some way. In other words,
something physical about it that can be
selected for. Again, I don't think
there's anything controversial about
that statement. So,
but then if it's physical and real and
has been selected on, you know, the
implication is we should be able to
measure it. Uh there should be it has to
offer an advantage for selection to act
on, and it and if it's a physical
process, it should be measurable, but we
don't really know what we're trying to
measure here. So, I then kind of revert
back to thinking, okay, what what would
a bacterial cell need to do? And this is
just just kind of
back of the envelope thinking. Uh and I
immediately think about metabolism.
What's the difference between the inside
of a bacterial cell and the outside
world? It's basically, you know, the
inside is is it it's metabolically
alive. It's doing stuff with its
chemistry all the time. And it's at a
colossal rate. A bacterial cell will
have about a billion reactions every
second in in this metabolism. So, I'm
immediately left wondering, how is it
all controlled?
How do you have How do you How do you
get this cell to have a coherent
behavior so it decides, I'm going to
crawl over there? Yeah. Um
how do you even know what state you're
in? How do you kind of synchronize all
of this biochemistry? And
probably most people's answer to that
would be metabolic regulation of one
sort or another. But, that's not really
the driver. The driver in the end is is
um
it's the thermodynamic drivers. How many
electrons do you have? That's in the
form of food or NADH or whatever it may
be. How much energy do you have in the
food or in the form of ATP? These are
the things that are going to synchronize
reactions in the same kind of phase. Um
and the problem there is when you're
dealing with molecules, you're dealing
with with tens of thousands of them. So,
you've got a kind of large statistical
sampling, which is time-consuming to
figure out. But, there is a better way
of doing it, which is to say, if you're
taking electrons from food and NADH, and
you're passing them to oxygen, but
you're generating a membrane potential,
and that's driving ATP synthesis, you
can actually measure the rate of change
in the the the membrane potential and
and and the the fields that would be
generated, electrostatic and
electromagnetic fields.
That's going to give you a handle on
your state, on your metabolic state in
relation to the outside world. You know,
you know, is there enough food there? Is
there enough oxygen there? Is there Is
it too hot? Is there a virus?
Uh do I have enough iron to be able to
do all these reactions? So, you've got
all these potentially conflicting
feedback loops, and you're going to make
a decision. So, you you're just just
thinking loosely about how a bacterial
cell is going to behave, you find that
you're you're you're already framing it
in terms of, well, as an entity, as a
cell,
um it's got to make a some kind of
decision about what to do. It's got to
integrate all this information and make
a coherent decision as a self, as an
entity. Um Is that free will? Probably
not in any way that we recognize it, but
it makes a decision in relation to its
environment, and and and and the outcome
is survival or not. Um So, what I think
a feeling is then is effectively it's
the it's the it's the electromagnetic
fields generated by membrane potential,
which is telling you what your physical
metabolic state is in relation to the
environment you're in. But, but that
leaves me to a question. So, if if if if
consciousness is somehow about
mitochondria, it it are the mitochondria
in that sense just really simply an ATP
generating engine, and you interfere
with the way they make ATP, and so
anesthetics work by effectively giving
you an energy deficit, the brain closes
down. That would be dull if it were
true, but it would be useful to know if
it were true. But, much more excitingly
would be Do Do mitochondria generate the
kind of fields that I was talking about
in in bacteria that are giving giving
some kind of indication of your status
in certain mitochondria, certain
neurons. Uh and the anesthetics
interfere with that. That would be
magical if that were true. That would be
a whole new direction of research, which
would be fantastic. Uh
and we you know, it's very difficult
measuring fields. It's It's very easy to
to measure artifacts that you don't know
what you're really doing. Um we need
more physicists working in this area to
to, you know, do do the hard
calculations. Uh and we need more data
on, you know, what what what what
actually is Is it really just in in one
of these respiratory complexes, complex
one? Or So, so there's lots of standard
molecular biology that we can do that
and it's beginning to point to this idea
that yes, there's there's something
going on about the way that complex one
works, which may link to generating
fields that may link to how anesthetics
work. And that's just fun.
Uh the thing that's great about science
is it's really fun. And and and that's
one thing I'm always trying to get
across to the people in my lab, you
can't forget the fun. If it becomes
drudgery, then you best go, cuz you'll
make much more money somewhere else.
You'll You'll You'll have a better life
somewhere else. But, if what you really
care about is is the is the is the
science and the experiments, it's got to
be fun. You've got to really enjoy
wanting to go and do that. And and and I
have to say, one of the great things for
me is it's it's always been fun.
>> Yeah. And it's been great to make your
essay get a sense of that feeling from
reading your books. Thank you. For the
audience, this conversation has been
most coupled with
Nick's book, The Vital Question. And so,
I would recommend
getting that if you want to better um
follow the argument here. And there's a
way more detail there that too much, but
uh that would be helpful. And
I think
one, this is the thing I was telling you
earlier, that it feels
a niche of books which unfortunately,
there's just very few of. So, there's
textbooks which, yeah, you can spend
2,000 pages learning about molecular
biology, but a layperson just is
practically who's curious is just
practically not going to get a chance to
do that. On the other end, there's what
are basically just like anecdotes about
scientists or anecdotes about the
history of science.
Uh and this, you know, this one
discoverer was really mercurial, and
here's how he ran his lab, and here's
how his parents were like. But, it never
really talks about the actual relevant
science. And a book like this actually
does fill the explanatory middle.
>> Yeah. Thank you.
>> Yes. I mean, I I think that I think that
physicists are very good at writing
books about the big questions of the
universe.
>> Yeah. Uh
and and there's a large readership for
for having your mind blown by a book
that you're not going to understand
everything, cuz you know it's difficult.
>> Right. Um and how Do we know anything at
all about the Big Bang
>> or how black holes work, or background
radiation, or whatever it may be. And
with life, you know, the origin of life
or the the the the trajectory of life on
a planet, and whether we get complex
life inevitably or whether we're going
to get stuck with bacteria in most
places. These are big questions,
universe-sized questions. And there's
not many people writing about them and
trying to take you to the edge of what
we know
>> Right. uh in the way that the physicists
very often do. And and just say, well,
you know, here's how I see it. Here's
Here's the questions through my eyes.
And and you've got to try and be honest
and say, okay, I'm not you know, I I see
it this way, other people see it
differently.
>> Yeah. By the way, the fact that LLMs
exist has made the process of reading a
book like this much more feasible and
productive. So, I I had a book club with
a couple of my friends, and
uh you know, we're just uh we're not
biologists. We're sort of laypeople to
this audience. And so, it was it I I do
encourage people uh for a book like this
to see if you can like form a book club
or something, because and just like talk
to LLMs a bunch, because there's just a
bunch of extremely basic remedial
chemistry and biology that we were able
to recapitulate with the help of the
LLMs. And so, you know, this whole thing
of why is the CO2 and H2 reaction
incentivized when one side is alkaline
and one side is acidic in this early
environment, you just go through the
remedial chemistry with the LLM. Yeah,
so I mean, I did my best to explain it
in the book and it seems I didn't do a
great job of it, but No, no, no, you you
you it's very There's so much detail and
and and and you know, you can't avoid
that because it's there in the questions
and this is a problem with biology is
it's incredibly complex and you know,
physicists look at biology and they
think, well, it's just too hard to
explain and biologists who've got all of
these terminology and often get lost in
the terminology and and I I I find
myself by nature trying to find simple
common denominators and that lends
itself then to writing about them, but
of course, I probably oversimplify all
the time or maybe I fail and don't
simplify it enough, but
you wrestle with it and you try to make
it work and and it's actually it's
genuinely interesting for me
to to talk to you and the other guys in
the book club
to see where you were struggling with it
and where you were, you know, I I will I
will build this into next time I'm
writing a book. I'll try and figure out,
okay, how how do I do that better? Well,
this has been great
and yeah, thank you for the the guide
through both the remedial biology and
chemistry, but also through many of the
most interesting questions that you
could ask about life. Been great fun.
Thanks a lot. Hey everybody, I hope you
enjoyed that episode. If you did, the
most helpful thing you can do is just
share it with other people who you think
might enjoy it. It's also helpful if you
leave a rating or a comment on whatever
platform you're listening on.
If you're interested in sponsoring the
podcast, you can reach out at
thwack.com/advertise.
Otherwise, I'll see you on the next one.